---
layout: post
title:  "Versatile Virgil"
date:   2015-10-26
---

*How does an author—widely quoted, more widely loved—lose hold of authority?*

In a perverse moment of the *Confessions*, Augustine of Hippo belittles Virgil’s *Aeneid* as a collection of fables, legible for boyhood angst. Yet he also asks: “Why then did I hate the Greek which has similar songs to sing?” (*Conf.* 22-3). For the Latin West, coterminous with the literate West in the Middle Ages, the work of Virgil was vastly more popular than the work of his Hellenic antecedent. The primary reason was linguistic: “the difficulty of learning a foreign language at all,” Augustine postulates. Comparing the respective millennia after the written dissemination of each—Homeric epics ca. 8th century BC, the *Aeneid* in 19 BC—there is a crucial similarity of schoolroom monopoly. Any serious student, born over a span of 2500 years, learned at least one of Homer’s Greek and Virgil’s Latin. Yet, there is an intriguing discrepancy in the style of their receptions, and the attitudes of receivers. References to Homer in works on criticism, philosophy, history, and statecraft presumed his unmatched authority. The use of Virgil’s work, while cognizant of his literary genius and the *Aeneid*’s breadth, was far more flexible. Homeric epic remains indelibly and unavoidably itself, *sui generis*; it defines ethical and aesthetic ‘good’ with esoteric distance. Virgil can be known, adapted, his *sententiae* adopted for a panoply of causes and contexts. His epic inspires centuries of poets, philosophers, and learned men with varying agendas. Augustine’s era was one of the last in which a Western scholar would have access to both Latin and Greek. Even so, the blind Poet is too pagan, too old, and inaccessible; the Roman’s fables, by contrast, are required reading.

To start off, as a case study in Homer’s versatile reception, we might look to Herodotus’ *Histories*—the broadest, most versatile writer on the late Archaic world, for both ancients and moderns. Some allusions are indirect, capitulating literary tropes (lying dreams, misconstrued oracles) familiar to his audience. Others reference explicitly: in his discussion of Helen’s attested sojourn to Egypt, Herodotus quotes lines from the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* as evidence. “I think Homer was familiar with the story [λόγον]; for though he rejected it as less suitable [εὐπρεπὴς] for epic poetry than the one he actually used, he left indications that it was not unknown to him.” After quoting, he concludes: “Homer makes it quite clear in these passages that he knew about Paris going out of his way to Egypt” (Hdt. 2.116). The agency which Herodotus ascribes to the Poet seems odd. Used in retrospect, ‘Homer’ (even ‘the Poet’) is metonymy for the Homeric corpus; the epic author’s personage is recursive.<sup><a name="n1" href="#f1">1</a></sup> The language here is anthropomorphic, presuming an individual author’s intent where Herodotus’ meaning is more precisely ‘archaic truth’. Also characterizing the historian’s lexical attitude: λόγον conveys ‘story’ with a medial degree of fiction, between fable (μῦθος) and truer history (ἱστορία); and εὐπρεπὴς, an emphatic of πρέπω, matches the word Plato, Plutarch, and other later critics would use to describe poetry as ‘seemly, fitting’ (or not). Even while contradicting the epic narrative, Herodotus presumes Homer (really ‘Homer’) is our best intermediary for proto-historical truth. The Poet exercises good judgment in curating stories for inclusion—within the epics and thus ‘human knowledge’.

Homer owes another famous legacy to the anxieties of Empedocles, Plato, and Epicurus et al among the philosophers of classical Greece. Any serious thinker, doing the business of ethical or cosmic theory, interacted deeply with Homeric evidence. In his *Republic*, Plato spurns sections of the ancient epics (along with poetry at large) for their corrupting or enfeebling powers. Taking issue with the depiction of Hades especially, Plato has Socrates ‘expunge’ [ἐξαλείψομεν] lines from Book 11 of the *Odyssey* and throughout the *Iliad* describing the awful fate of the dead (*Rep.* 386c ff.). Centuries later, Plutarch added his own voice to the cacophony with a thoroughly pragmatic essay, placating Plato’s worries and dismissing Empedocles’ oversimplifying.<sup><a name="n2" href="#f2">2</a></sup> He offers a popularly held compromise: the poet (primarily Homer) is a conscientious mediator, signaling immoral material by warning with fabulous language, adopting the guise of an offensive character, or using the name of a god to signify some abstract, incomprehensible agent, as in Zeus’ scales (*Mor.* 23c ff.). Homer is an intellectual authority par excellence, who *must* support (or be *shown* to support, if only implicitly) the premises of any Greek intellectual program.

The centuries between Homer and Plato number similarly to those between Virgil an Augustine. Whereas Homer’s ethical insinuations worried Plato, Virgil’s nationalist or theological ruminations do not spurn a post-imperium Christian audience. In spite of Anchises’ underworld speech qua cosmological melting pot (*A.* 6.724 ff.), including a veritable smorgasbord of non-Christian approaches to spiritual immortality (Epicurean, Stoic, Neoplatonist, Eastern, and mystery-cultish), Virgil is the figure of choice for touring Hell. Whereas Homer’s strange, passé depiction of Hades caused more than one Athenian a headache, *any* good Latinist can do work on Virgilian imagery and philosophy, sans contrived allegory. Macrobius devoted the third through sixth books of his *Saturnalia* to the versatile talents, uses, and influences of Virgil—as poet, theologian, philosopher, and reader of Homer. Fulgentius recast the entire *Aeneid* as proto-Bildungsroman. Much later, the 12th-century Old French *Roman d’Eneas* consciously kept Anchises’ Underworld speech, albeit bastardized and declawed of its precise significance. The episode gained its longevity as a literary trope in the canon of Latin literature, remembered for its marvelousness and divorced from philosophical contradiction. Unlike the Old Testament, Virgil can be taken piecemeal; he is allowed to be incorrect.

As writers of their eras or *mentalités*, Homer and Virgil offer different authorities— though only the latter is an ‘author’. Athenian writers believed that the Homeric epics encapsulated real actions of the divine and semi-divine in an Age of Heroes, or at least symbolic truths of the universe. In the twentieth century, pursuant to theories of oral composition and reception, scholars viewed the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* as gradual amalgamations of an entire Panhellenic civilization. Yet, this arrived alongside the anthropological renderings of a Bronze Age Aegean that is altogether alien. We allow Homeric evidence to color (as folklore might) our conception of a broad culture, from its luxury objects (Nestor’s cup) to espoused values (xenia). Achilles and Agamemnon enter into a dated, material culture; they are actors within a human conflict, but one distant, ‘unlike us’ in the same vein as the Franchthi cave’s painters. The transition from mythic to historical time is a recurring theme in the *Aeneid*’s prophecies. In this framework, Classical Athens and Augustan Rome live on as ‘modern’ civilizations: Plato’s and Cicero’s concerns mirror ours enough to warrant citation, memorization; details we lack about their lives draw upon relatively vivid backgrounds. Where Homer is diachronic and regional, Virgil’s invention is singular and located. His cult reverences an individual: a not-anonymous, Foucauldian author. Then too, there are reductive tendencies in the reception of Roman writers broadly, so often themselves the conspicuous middlemen for arcane Greek antecedents. In this sense, the *Aeneid*, from its epithets to its similes, is the apotheosis of imitation-emulation writing. Horace’s directive is fulfilled: “vos exemplaria Graeca/nocturna versate manu, versate diurna” (*Ars* 268-9). But Virgil accomplished a subtler victory, dragging ‘the matter of Troy’ into contemporaneity—and modernity. Homeric epic remains a vital inclusion in the human(istic) project; Virgil’s in the modern one.

Virgil’s personal brand of *auctoritas* lent the *Aeneid* accessibility and urgency while also laying the groundwork for adaptation, subtraction, and appropriation. Particular devices offer clear access to Virgil’s motives. Early on, he juxtaposes Neptune’s rule of the turbulent sea with a riotous mob calmed by a man *pietate* and *gravem*—that is, the ideal politician; that is, Augustus (*A.* 1.151). This simile might resurface in the *sententiae* of a late medieval or Renaissance writer, unlikely to be still within the context of Octavian. Complex prophecies and *ekphrases*, as of Aeneas’ shield, play with narrative temporality and prophesize (propagandize) the *ex nihilo* order of the Augustan principate. As in Livy’s (moralizing) history, Virgil names Romulus, the kings, and L. J. Brutus—great men of a great, early Rome—of whom there stood statues in Augustus’ Roman forum. In the *Roman d’Eneas*, the basic tropes remain, shield and all), neutered of historical specificity. The medieval author does not care for early Roman history as much as the weight of noticeable allusion. Thus too in the story of Dido, where Virgil’s intent is crystalline: staging the Roman-Carthaginian rivalry in all its gravity and bloodshed. Yet the Tyrian queen, filtered through Ovid, becomes *any* woman for Augustine—himself a Roman African with perhaps Berber and Phoenician descent. He does not care for her political significance; he chastises only boyhood tears, the story an impediment to a purer Christian soul. That Virgil can be so easily denuded of his political moment sets him apart from Homer: he can mean something to anyone, a temporal and geographic scope outmatching even the *Aeneid’s*.

By the time of premodern Europe, following a resurgence of antiquarian knowledge, Virgil’s divorce from historical truth was only a matter of extent. In a detailed article on ‘anachronism’, Margreta de Grazia argues the idea relied on *Aeneid* Book II for its currency. More than a few great Renaissance minds calculated Aeneas and Dido to have lived some centuries apart; some went further, claiming that the ‘real’ Aeneas *never* stopped in Carthage. Johnson’s *Dictionary* (1755) and Diderot’s *Encyclopédie* (1751) offer the Aeneas-Dido romance as the unary example in their entries on ‘anachronism’. John Dryden, dedicating his translation of the *Aeneid*, forgives Virgil’s error on the grounds of his having not read the Bible (foremost source of all truth) and *poetic license*.<sup><a name="n3" href="#f3">3</a></sup> This goes beyond Plutarch’s cautionary proverb—”‘many are the lies the poets tell,’ some intentionally and others unintentionally” (*Mor.* 16a)—to posit that Virgil need not even *want* to be correct. The *Aeneid* could remain a pedagogical goldmine: a source for good learning and good Latin, nothing more or less.

Why did it make sense for Dante to include Virgil as his guide—poetic muse—through a Christian underworld, without regard for political or philosophical incongruities? Virgil led *his* reader through a vastly different inferno by means of *Aeneid*’s sixth book. Yet, the poet was essential inspiration for so much ‘good’ literature by ‘good’ Christians. Homer would *not* have made sense, even if Dante had known him directly; the more ancient epics are rigid and distant. Virgil’s work was decidedly Roman; but after 380 AD, ‘Roman’ had become synonymous with ‘Christian’ and, in turn, ‘European’. In the Renaissance, he could be simply ‘classical’, available to all.

Two millennia after Virgil left the world, his *Aeneid* unfinished, a museum in New York City etched in steel one of his lines. “No day shall erase you from the memory of time” once commemorated the sacrificial deaths of two colonizing Trojan soldiers, and now the tragic murders of three thousand Americans civilians, to non-universal acclaim.<sup><a name="n4" href="#f4">4</a></sup> When the museum opted to eliminate the word “Aeneid,” it placed itself in a long postclassical tradition of Virgilian versatility, divorcing author from *auctoritas*.

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<font size="2">
<div><sup><a name="f1" href="#n1">1</a></sup>  C.f. ‘Deuteronomists’, fabled writers whose denotation (and working biography) both depends on and informs their written record.</div>

<div><sup><a name="f2" href="#n2">2</a></sup> Namely: ‘Ares’ and ‘Aprodite’ as cosmic, deterministic forces ‘love’ and ‘strife’ (Plut. Mor. 19e)</div>

<div><sup><a name="f3" href="#n3">3</a></sup>  Margreta de Grazia, “Anachronism,” in Cultural Reformations: Medieval and Renaissance in Literary History, ed. Brian Cummings and James Simpson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 17–19.</div>

<div><sup><a name="f4" href="#n4">4</a></sup>  The New York Times devoted multiple articles to the controversy: for an early opinion piece, see Caroline Alexander’s “Out of Context” (6 Apr 2011); for a lengthier treatment and some scholars’ attitudes, see David W.
Dunlap’s “A Memorial Inscription’s Grim Origins” and “Scholarly Perspectives on Inscription at the 9/11 Memorial
Museum” (2 Apr 2014).</div>
</font>

Originally written for Prof. Rita Copeland's fall 2015 course, "Ancient Epic and the Romance of Pagan Antiquity".
